                      (-*- text -*-)

               Subversion Commandline Client:  Test Suite
               ==========================================

The cmdline client test suite doesn't use the C-level testing
framework, but is structured similarly.  Instead of testing library
APIs, it drives the client just like a user would, examining the
output and the on-disk results (i.e., the working copy) carefully as
it goes.  In other words, this is "black box" testing of the
command-line client.  It has no access to code internals; it never
looks inside the .svn/ directory; it only performs actions that a
human user would do.

These tests require Python 2.0 or later.

  [ For more general information on Subversion's testing system,
    please read the README in subversion/tests/. ]


How To Run The Tests
====================

To run a test script over ra_local, just invoke it from this
directory.  Invoke the script with no arguments to run all the tests
in that script:

   $ ./basic_tests.py

Invoke with one numeric argument to run that particular test:

   $ ./basic_tests.py 7

And invoke with the "list" argument to show a list of all tests in
that script:

   $ ./basic_tests.py list


Running over ra_dav
-------------------

Running a script over ra_dav is basically the same, but you have to
set up httpd 2.0 first (on the same machine, since the tests create
repositories on the fly), and pass a URL argument to the test scripts.

Assuming you have httpd 2.0 installed in /usr/local/apache2, just add
two Location directives to /usr/local/apache2/conf/httpd.conf, with
paths adjusted appropriately:

   <Location /repositories>
     DAV svn
     SVNParentPath /home/jrandom/projects/svn/subversion/tests/clients/cmdline/repositories
     AuthType Basic
     AuthName "Subversion Repository"
     AuthUserFile /usr/local/apache2/conf/users
     Require valid-user
   </Location>
     
   <Location /local_tmp/repos>
     DAV svn
     SVNPath /home/jrandom/projects/svn/subversion/tests/clients/cmdline/local_tmp/repos
     AuthType Basic
     AuthName "Subversion Repository"
     AuthUserFile /usr/local/apache2/conf/users
     Require valid-user
   </Location>

Httpd should be running on port 80.  You may also need to ensure that
it's running as you, so it has read/write access to the repositories
that are probably living in your Subversion working copy.  To do this,
set the User and Group directives in httpd.conf, something like this:

   User jrandom
   Group users

You need to run the tests over ra_dav with authentication enabled, so
just drop the following 2-line snippet into the
/usr/local/apache2/conf/users file:

----------------------------
jrandom:xCGl35kV9oWCY
jconstant:xCGl35kV9oWCY
----------------------------

Now, (re)start Apache and run the tests over ra_dav.

You can run a test script over ra_dav:

   $ ./basic_tests.py --url http://localhost
   $ ./basic_tests.py --url http://localhost 3

or 

   $ ./basic_tests.py --url=http://localhost
   $ ./basic_tests.py --url=http://localhost 3

If you run httpd on a port other than 80, you can specify the port in
the URL: "http://localhost:15835" for example.

To run all tests over ra_dav, pass BASE_URL when running 'make check'
from the top of the build dir:

   $ make check BASE_URL=http://localhost

BASE_URL=URL can also be used when running individual tests:

   $ ./basic_tests.py BASE_URL=http://localhost
   $ ./basic_tests.py BASE_URL=http://localhost 3


Running over ra_svn
-------------------

It's also easy to run the tests against a local svnserve:

$ subversion/svnserve/svnserve -d -r `pwd`/subversion/tests/clients/cmdline
$ make check BASE_URL=svn://localhost

or, to run individual tests,

$ ./basic_tests.py --url=svn://localhost 3




Directory Contents
==================

   *.py                  The tests themselves.

   svntest/              Python package, provides test suite framework

          /main.py:         Global vars, utility routines; exports
                            run_tests(), the main test routine.

          /tree.py:         Infrastructure for SVNTreeNode class.
                              - tree constructors, tree comparison routines.
                              - routines to parse subcommand output into
                                specific kinds of trees.
                              - routines to parse a working copy and
                                entries files into specific kinds of trees.

          /wc.py:           Functions for interacting with a working
                            copy, and converting to/from trees.

          /actions.py:      Main API for driving subversion client and
                            using trees to verify results. 

          /entry.py:        Parse an `entries' file (### not used yet)



What the Python Tests are Doing
===============================

I.  Theory

  A. Types of Verification

   The point of this test system is that it's *automated*: that is,
   each test can algorithmically verify the results and indicate "PASS"
   or "FAIL".

   We've identified two broad classes of verification:

   1.  Verifying svn subcommand output.

      Most important subcommands (co, up, ci, im, st) print results to
      stdout as a list of paths.  Even though the paths may be printed
      out in an unpredictable order, we still want to make sure this
      list is exactly the *set* of lines we expect to get.

   2.  Verifying the working copy itself.

      Every time a subcommand could potentially change something on
      disk, we need to inspect the working copy.  Specifically, this
      means we need to make sure the working copy has exactly the
      tree-structure we expect, and each file has exactly the contents
      and properties we expect.


II.  Practice:  Trees

  Sam TH <sam@uchicago.edu> proposed and began work on a solution
  whereby all important, inspectable information is parsed into a
  general, in-memory tree representation.  By comparing actual
  vs. expected tree structures, we get automated verification.

  A.  Tree node structure

      Each "tree node" in a tree has these fields:

      - name :  the name of the node
      - children:  list of child nodes (if the node is a dir)
      - contents:  textual contents (if the node is a file)
      - properties:  a hash to hold subversion props
      - atts:        a hash of meta-information about tree nodes themselves


  B.  Parsing subcommand output into a tree

      Special parsers examine lines printed by subcommands, and
      convert them into a tree of tree-nodes.  The 'contents' and
      'properties' fields are empty; but prepending on the subcommand,
      specific attributes in the 'atts' field are set in tree-nodes:

       - svn co/up:        a 'status' attribute is set to a two-character
                           value from the set (A, D, G, U, C, _, ' ') or
                           a 'verb' attribute is set to ('Restored')

       - svn status:       a 'status' attribute (as above), plus 'wc_rev'
                           and 'repos_rev' attributes to hold the wc
                           and repos revision numbers.

       - svn ci/im:        a 'verb' attribute is set to one of
                           (Adding, Sending, Deleting)


  C.  Parsing a working copy into a tree

     We also have a routines that walks a regular working copy and
     returns a tree representing disk contents and props.  In this
     case the 'atts' hash in each node is empty, but the 'contents'
     and 'props' fields are filled in.



How to Write New Tests
======================

If you'd like to write a new python test, first decide which file it
might fit into; test scripts each contain collections of tests grouped
by rough categories.  (Is it testing a new subcommand?  New
enhancement?  Tricky use-case?  Regression test?)

Next, read the long documentation comment at the top of
svntest/tree.py.  It will explain the general API that most tests use.

Finally, try copying-and-pasting a simple test and then edit from
there.  Don't forget to add your test to the 'test_list' variable at
the bottom of the file.


